Launch (#16)
volkamerlab/volkamerlab_org: content/projects/knowtox.md

---
title: "Knowtox"
date: 2020-05-20T16:27:08+02:00

weight: 10
nav: false

people:
- key: andrea-lilian.morger
- key: andrea.volkamer

collaborators:
- name: Miriam Mathea
  link: https://www.basf.com/
- name: Janosch Achenbach
  link: https://www.basf.com/
- name: Robert Landsiedel
  link: https://www.basf.com/
- name: Roland Buesen
  link: https://www.basf.com/
- name: Antje Wolf
  link: https://www.basf.com/
- name: Klaus-Juergen Schleifer
  link: https://www.basf.com/

publications:
- morger_2020_knowtox

external_resources:
- name: knowtox_manuscript_SI
  link: https://github.com/volkamerlab/knowtox_manuscript_SI
  icon: github

>   more: SI notebook - built & evaluate conformal predictor and apply to external data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  more: SI notebook - build & evaluate conformal predictor and apply to external data
```

funding:
- name: Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, grant ID 031A262C
- name: HaVo-Stiftung
- name: We thank BASF for supporting this project by providing financial resources

summary: |
  KnowTox is a novel pipeline that combines three different _in silico_ toxicology approaches to allow for confident prediction of potentially toxic effects of novel chemical entities, i.e. machine learning models, alerts for toxic substructures and computational support for read-across.
---

> Computational tools for toxicity prediction are promising in the process of reducing, refining and replacing animal testing. To assess the toxicity of novel chemical entities, regulatory agencies require in vivo testing for several toxic endpoints. In 2010, roughly 2.9 million laboratory animals have been deployed in Germany, with an increase of 6% since 2008. Thus, the establishment of alternative methods, and with it the reduction of animal testing, is of utmost importance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Computational tools for toxicity prediction are promising in the process of reducing, refining and replacing animal testing. To assess the toxicity of novel chemical entities, regulatory agencies require in vivo testing for several toxic endpoints. In 2017, roughly 2.19 million laboratory animals have been deployed in Germany for regulatory testing purposes (~11 % of those for testing industrial chemicals). Thus, the establishment of alternative methods, and with it the reduction of animal testing, is of utmost importance.
```
add respective link: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1581689520921&uri=CELEX:52020DC0016

Reviewer: * I would change `11 %` to `11%`
* `of utmost importance` is used again in the next paragraph, i.e. `When applying machine learning models, applicability and reliability of predictions for new chemicals are of utmost importance.` Could we change one of them with e.g. `much-needed` or `of extreme importance`?

* If I understand the report correctly, the new numbers are for the European Union, so we should exchange `in Germany` by `in the European Union` (see Eu Report animal use, p. 13)  - do you agree @AndreaVolkamer ?

> KnowTox is a novel pipeline that combines three different _in silico_ toxicology approaches to allow for confident prediction of potentially toxic effects of novel chemical entities, i.e. machine learning models, alerts for toxic substructures and computational support for read-across.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While grouping of molecules and read-across are already the most widely used non-animal methods (ECHA), *KnowTox* is a novel pipeline that combines three different _in silico_ toxicology approaches to substantiate the forecasts and to allow for confident prediction of potentially toxic effects of novel chemical entities. KnowTox combines machine learning models, alerts for toxic substructures and computational support for read-across.
```
add external link to 'ECHA': https://echa.europa.eu/-/alternatives-to-animal-testing-continue-to-be-widely-used

Reviewer 2: if we agree on this new sentence, it must also be adapted in the 'summary' part above.

Reviewer 2: and please adapt the funding sentence to:
We thank BASF for financial support.
(instead of We thank BASF for supporting this project by providing financial resources)

Reviewer: I am not sure if KnowTox is really able to substantiate the forecasts. Is it possible that RL meant, that it would be helpful for KnowTox if the forecasts (made by KnowTox) could be substantiated (e.g. with experimental data)?
If @AndreaVolkamer is certain about it, I agree to to the new version. Otherwise, I would suggest to shorten the first sentence to `While grouping of molecules and read-across are already the most widely used non-animal methods (ECHA), *KnowTox* is a novel pipeline that combines three different _in silico_ toxicology approaches to allow for confident prediction of potentially toxic effects of novel chemical entities.`

> {{< xfigure src="/images/research/knowtox.png" caption="KnowTox" >}}

Reviewer 2: This figure doesn't change the size as others do, maybe add imageclass="fit", as in the other figure below?
```suggestion
{{< xfigure src="/images/research/knowtox.png" caption="KnowTox" imageclass="fit">}}
```

Author: Some CSS changes were needed so this wasn't buggy (overexpanding beyond original resolution). This is now fixed!

> {{< xfigure src="/images/research/knowtox.png" caption="Overview of KnowTox. Combining toxicity information from different sources, the complementary outputs of the KnowTox tool help to generate a holistic toxicity prediction picture for a novel query compound (figure taken from [Morger, 2020](/publications/#morger_2020_knowtox))." imageclass="fit" >}}

Author: Please check last commit to see if it's ok now: https://launch--admiring-blackwell-3e6756.netlify.app/projects/knowtox/

> {{< xfigure src="/images/research/knowtox.png" caption="Overview of KnowTox. Combining toxicity information from different sources, the complementary outputs of the KnowTox tool help to generate a holistic toxicity prediction picture for a novel query compound (figure taken from [Morger, 2020](/publications/#morger_2020_knowtox))." imageclass="fit" >}}

Reviewer 2: @jaimergp much better thanks! 
For future project figure additions we might want to use rather horizontal layouts (at least on a laptop they might fit to the text better, not sure about cell phones though).

> {{< xfigure src="/images/research/knowtox.png" caption="Overview of KnowTox. Combining toxicity information from different sources, the complementary outputs of the KnowTox tool help to generate a holistic toxicity prediction picture for a novel query compound (figure taken from [Morger, 2020](/publications/#morger_2020_knowtox))." imageclass="fit" >}}

Author: When using a vertical display like a smartphone, it looks like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2559438/84481672-b5990e00-ac96-11ea-888d-e134c70ba25a.png)

Landscape figures, in contrast, look like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2559438/84481698-bfbb0c80-ac96-11ea-8612-15c3ba14a4e6.png)
